---
published: false
---
## It's time to take COVID-19 seriously

I know I've annoyed all of you over the past 2 months warning that this was going to turn into a pandemic. It is now, officially. This was the clear trajectory from looking at the data and linear policy responses to a clearly exponential problem. Just because some are finally taking this seriously does not mean that all is clear. This situation will get much worse before it gets better. We are still acting too slow, testing too little, and living too normally.

### Some thoughts

* Panic vs preparation and precaution. I'm not urging you all to panic and I am not panicking. However, I am taking preparation and precaution **very** seriously. Life is what physicists (and, increasingly, biologists) would call non-ergodic. That means it's heavily path-dependent. Once you hit a bad enough event, the possibility of great future events is no longer relevant and all future probabilities basically go to 0. Would you take a bet that could double your net worth 85% of the time but wipe you out completely 15% of the time? Likely not. The bet that we're taking by continuing normalcy throughout COVID has similar odds but significantly worse payouts. 85% of the time you keep what you have and 15% of the time you lose very significantly. The downside is bad enough that it's worth disrupting our lives, worth reducing future earnings by staying at home, worth reducing temporary enjoyment by avoiding others, and worth looking a bit silly to the linearly-thinking sheep who laugh at ahead-of-time preparation (it's not really ahead-of-time anymore anyway) in the face of an exponentially increasing situation. If you order something on Amazon that takes 3 days to get here, there will be twice as many people with COVID by the time it arrives. If you think it's silly to buy today, it will be **significantly** less silly when it arrives.

* We take the convenience of modern society for granted. This isn't about guns but all know that I own guns and most of you think that's silly. I own a gun because the time you actually need one is precisely the time when society isn't able to help you. You need your gun when the police are a few minutes away and there's a situation developing over the next few seconds. We're in that situation now. We are trained to defer to authority and let the government do our thinking. The FDA tells us what medicine is safe and effective and the legislature tells us what the bounds of proper social interaction ought to be. These institutions have failed us badly already and deserve no more credence as this pandemic continues. We **must** think for ourselves and take responsibility for our own wellbeing. Government officials care only about reelection. If you act early, you prevent the very panic that you need to justify action. Therefore, expect government to continue to act far too late to be of any use to us. If your city isn't yet on official lockdown, it's not because it's safe, it's because the government is too dumb or too scared to protect you. **YOU** must protect you now. We should all consider ourselves on lockdown now (and should have for a few weeks).

* The official statistics are wrong. [We have performed](https://ourworldindata.org/covid-testing), to date, a few more tests per capita than India and the Philipines and fewer than Armenia or Lithuania. COVID is already endemic where all of us live. You should not assume that anyone you meet or know doesn't already have it. I am trying not to see the over 60 crowd because I've been in NYC in the past 2 weeks and assume that I have it. The government is trying to quell panic, not to accurately inform those fighting the pandemic. People who need it are still refused tests.
